README.md, before:

# macrosynth
###### Demo coming soon™!
![overview of the macrosynth](mainoverview.jpg)  
A synth for the Adafruit MacroPad RP2040 using TodBot's Synthplug for audio out (a headphone amplifier may be required for headphones, also use a portable battery to avoid the annoying hum when powering the macropad from a computer)

Components:
 - Adafruit MacroPad RP2040 (CAD$77)
   - https://www.adafruit.com/product/5128
   - (was out of stock so I got mine through digikey)
   - https://www.digikey.ca/en/products/detail/adafruit-industries-llc/5128/14635377
 - Todbot's MacroPadSynthPlug - or another way to get audio out from the RP2040 (code will probably need to be updated)  
 
   - https://www.tindie.com/products/todbot/macropadsynthplug-turn-rp2040-into-a-synth/
   - https://github.com/todbot/macropadsynthplug
   - Shipped very quick (even before the board!)
   
A *large* part of the complicated timing and clock-BPM sync was adapted from @todbot's drum machine script (linked above), as well as the many projects he's made involving the RP2040 and audio (including his midisynth and monosynth)



# Usage

A very basic synth (at the moment), the top keys select the various menus displayed on the screen on the left, with the bottom 8 keys playing the notes root5 -> root6

## Main
### 1.0 (Main page 1)
Selected by default
 - Key [Maj only atm - although if you know your relative minors this won't matter XD]
   - selects the root note and changes the scale of the 8 keys
 - Wave [Saw, Square, Sine, DistSine (sine wave convolved with a noise func.), Noise]
 - Octave [-1 - 8]
   - Changing the octave and placing a note in the sequencer does not remove the previous note, even if the pad is still lit (ie, C6 and C4 can trigger on the same beat, but the pad will not visually convey this - unsure on fix? Soln: remember what notes you pressed :P)

### 1.1 (Main page 2)
turns off all active notes (panic button)

## Synth options
### 2.0 (Synth page 1)
ADSR options, since there's only 1 osc at the moment there's not much to configure so I removed sustain.  
**If the notes played in the sequencer sound really plucky (and you don't want that), you have to increase the release a bit since they're only hit for a single clock cycle**

### 2.1 (Synth page 2)
 - Filter Type [None, Low-pass, High-pass, Band-pass]
 - Filter Frequency [50Hz increments]

### 2.2 (Synth page 3)
 - Mono-Legato [on, off]
 - Time [Lower = longer slide time, higher = faster]


Mono-legato is achieved by attaching a linear LFO (ie, y=x) to the pitch-bend of a note and then bending the previous note to the new note:
 - Mono legato is enabled
 - Note D5 is held, D5 is played
 - Note B5 is held, D5 is turned off, linear LFO with amplitude = (the difference between D5 and B5) = 9, and cycle = time, is created and attached to D5
 - D5 is played and bends to B5 following the pitch curve of the LFO

This function works even when intermediate notes are released:
 - D5 held, D5 plays
 - B5 held, D5 bends to B5
 - G5 held, B5 bends to G5
  - If G5 is released, G5 bends back down to B5
  - If G5 is held, and B5 is released, then when G5 is released it will bend down to D5

In short, when a key is released, it will bend to the most recently played, still-held note.

This works in the sequencer, but only bending up to a note. I can't get it to bend back down after a note has ended.
**TODO**: Fix this 

## Sequencer
### 3.0 (Seq page 1)
Sequencer BPM is 120. I can't believe I forgot to add a option to change this (editable in the code tho).  
**TODO**: add bpm option to seq menu

Pressing the sequencer key once enters the step sequencer mode. Scroll the encoder to select the step to edit (the current step is highlighted).  
 - Pressing a note once turns it red. This is a *hit*, it will be triggered on that beat.  
 - Pressing a hit again turns it blue. This is a *hold*, if, on the beat before, this note was hit, it will hold that note (ie, not turn off between beats)

As mentioned above, a note of differing octaves can occur on the same beat, just without the visual feedback.  

**TODO**: Add options to change different notes' synth options independently (use the orange button to cycle through presets?)

Pressing the encoder to the ">Del" option clears the current step, sweep through the steps to clear all

### 3.1 (Seq page 2)
Press the sequencer key again to play the sequence, turn the encoder on this screen to expand the steps (doubles the current steps), with different colours to signify where you are in 2 bar loop (Pink -> Blue -> Yellow -> White)   
**TODO**: 8 steps = 0.5 Bar is kinda weird, maybe allow user to change how long each step is?

While the sequencer is playing, you can leave the sequencer page and it will continue playing, allowing you to change the synth options or the wavetype as the sequence plays

Commit message:

molego is completely broken in seq mode

README.md, after:

# macrosynth
###### Demo coming soon™!
![overview of the macrosynth](mainoverview.jpg)  
A synth for the Adafruit MacroPad RP2040 using TodBot's Synthplug for audio out (a headphone amplifier may be required for headphones, also use a portable battery to avoid the annoying hum when powering the macropad from a computer)

Components:
 - Adafruit MacroPad RP2040 (CAD$77)
   - https://www.adafruit.com/product/5128
   - (was out of stock so I got mine through digikey)
   - https://www.digikey.ca/en/products/detail/adafruit-industries-llc/5128/14635377
 - Todbot's MacroPadSynthPlug - or another way to get audio out from the RP2040 (code will probably need to be updated)  
 
   - https://www.tindie.com/products/todbot/macropadsynthplug-turn-rp2040-into-a-synth/
   - https://github.com/todbot/macropadsynthplug
   - Shipped very quick (even before the board!)
   
A *large* part of the complicated timing and clock-BPM sync was adapted from @todbot's drum machine script (linked above), as well as the many projects he's made involving the RP2040 and audio (including his midisynth and monosynth)



# Usage

A very basic synth (at the moment), the top keys select the various menus displayed on the screen on the left, with the bottom 8 keys playing the notes root5 -> root6

## Main
### 1.0 (Main page 1)
Selected by default
 - Key [Maj only atm - although if you know your relative minors this won't matter XD]
   - selects the root note and changes the scale of the 8 keys
 - Wave [Saw, Square, Sine, DistSine (sine wave convolved with a noise func.), Noise]
 - Octave [-1 - 8]
   - Changing the octave and placing a note in the sequencer does not remove the previous note, even if the pad is still lit (ie, C6 and C4 can trigger on the same beat, but the pad will not visually convey this - unsure on fix? Soln: remember what notes you pressed :P)

### 1.1 (Main page 2)
turns off all active notes (panic button)

## Synth options
The synth options are applied at note *start*  
That means that holding a note and changing synth parameters **will not do anything**, you have to trigger the note again to hear any changes  
**TODO**: Look at this? Does synthio allow the editing of currently playing notes?
### 2.0 (Synth page 1)
ADSR options, since there's only 1 osc at the moment there's not much to configure so I removed sustain.  
**If the notes played in the sequencer sound really plucky (and you don't want that), you have to increase the release a bit since they're only hit for a single clock cycle**

### 2.1 (Synth page 2)
 - Filter Type [None, Low-pass, High-pass, Band-pass]
 - Filter Frequency [50Hz increments]

### 2.2 (Synth page 3)
 - Mono-Legato [on, off]
 - Time [Lower = longer slide time, higher = faster]


Mono-legato is achieved by attaching a linear LFO (ie, y=x) to the pitch-bend of a note and then bending the previous note to the new note:
 - Mono legato is enabled
 - Note D5 is held, D5 is played
 - Note B5 is held, D5 is turned off, linear LFO with amplitude = (the difference between D5 and B5) = 9, and cycle = time, is created and attached to D5
 - D5 is played and bends to B5 following the pitch curve of the LFO

This function works even when intermediate notes are released:
 - D5 held, D5 plays
 - B5 held, D5 bends to B5
 - G5 held, B5 bends to G5
  - If G5 is released, G5 bends back down to B5
  - If G5 is held, and B5 is released, then when G5 is released it will bend down to D5

In short, when a key is released, it will bend to the most recently played, still-held note.

Completely broken in the sequencer. I suspect it has something to do with how the note_off function is handled  
**TODO**: Fix this 

## Sequencer
### 3.0 (Seq page 1)
Sequencer BPM is 120. I can't believe I forgot to add a option to change this (editable in the code tho).  
**TODO**: add bpm option to seq menu

Pressing the sequencer key once enters the step sequencer mode. Scroll the encoder to select the step to edit (the current step is highlighted).  
 - Pressing a note once turns it red. This is a *hit*, it will be triggered on that beat.  
 - Pressing a hit again turns it blue. This is a *hold*, if, on the beat before, this note was hit, it will hold that note (ie, not turn off between beats)

As mentioned above, a note of differing octaves can occur on the same beat, just without the visual feedback.  

**TODO**: Add options to change different notes' synth options independently (use the orange button to cycle through presets?)

Pressing the encoder to the ">Del" option clears the current step, sweep through the steps to clear all

### 3.1 (Seq page 2)
Press the sequencer key again to play the sequence, turn the encoder on this screen to expand the steps (doubles the current steps), with different colours to signify where you are in 2 bar loop (Pink -> Blue -> Yellow -> White)   
**TODO**: 8 steps = 0.5 Bar is kinda weird, maybe allow user to change how long each step is?

While the sequencer is playing, you can leave the sequencer page and it will continue playing, allowing you to change the synth options or the wavetype as the sequence plays
